---
layout: post
title: "PlaidCTF 2017 - FHE"
date: 2017-04-24
---

*The flag is encrypted with ElGamal and an additional layer of custom fully-homomorphic encryption.
We can recover the FHE key under known-message attack by solving a linear system.
The group used for ElGamal is weak (its order has small prime factors), so we can compute a discrete logarithm to recover the secret exponent and decrypt the flag.*

<!--more-->

### Description

If you didn’t get the memo, [homomorphic encryption](/resources/2017/plaidctf/FHE/FHE_d0ca7a0a7aa7b050c7cc45fe668b99d4.tgz) is the future.
But we might have to work out a few bugs first.

### Details

Points:      275

Category:    Crypto

Validations: 14

### A custom encryption scheme

We were given a [Sage script](/resources/2017/plaidctf/FHE/FHE.sage) describing the custom encryption scheme, along with a [public key](/resources/2017/plaidctf/FHE/pubkey) and [ciphertext](/resources/2017/plaidctf/FHE/enc).
Let's first understand the encryption scheme.

#### Custom FHE scheme

The custom FHE scheme works as follows.
Given a prime $$p$$, the field $$F = GF(p)$$ and a dimension $$n$$, the secret key consists of a random vector $$t \in F^n$$.
We denote by $$t'$$ the first $$n-1$$ elements of $$t$$, i.e. $$t' = (t_{1}, \ldots, t_{n-1})$$.

To encrypt a message $$x \in F$$, first generate a random matrix $$M \in F^{(n-1) \times n}$$ and compute the vector $$v = t' \cdot M$$.
Then, the ciphertext matrix $$C \in F^{n \times n}$$ consists of the $$n-1$$ rows of $$M$$ followed by the row $$C_n = \frac{1}{t_{n}} (x t - v)$$.

To decrypt it, first compute $$w = t \cdot C$$.
By construction, this is equal to $$x t$$, so the plaintext $$x$$ is equal to $$w_i / t_i$$ for any index $$i$$.

#### ElGamal

The flag is encrypted as follows.
We recognize [ElGamal encryption](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ElGamal_encryption) in $$F$$, with all values encoded with the FHE scheme.

```python
# Generate key
x = F.random_element()

g = F.multiplicative_generator()
G = fhe.encrypt(g)
H = G^x

z = F.random_element()
Z = fhe.encrypt(z)

# Public key
pubkey = (G, H, Z)

# Encrypt flag
m = int(FLAG.encode('hex'), 16)
M = fhe.encrypt(m)

y = F.random_element()
U = G^y
S = H^y

# Ciphertext
enc = (U, (M + Z) * S)
```

We are given two files containing the public key $$(G, H, Z)$$ and the ciphertext $$(U, C)$$.


### Solution

We first break the FHE scheme and then ElGamal.

#### Known-message attack against custom FHE

We first note that knowing any non-zero multiple $$\alpha t$$ of the key vector is sufficient to decrypt messages (we compute $$\alpha w$$ instead of $$w$$ and obtain $$x = \alpha w_i / \alpha t_i)$$.
In particular, we consider $$\tau = t / t_n$$ (such that $$\tau_n = 1$$) and aim at recovering $$\tau$$.

We note that the last ciphertext row $$C_n$$ is equal to $$x \tau - \tau' \cdot M$$.
If we denote by $$C_n'$$ and $$M'$$ the first $$n-1$$ columns of respectively $$C_n$$ and $$M$$, we obtain the following linear relation

$$C_n' = \tau' \cdot (x I_{n-1} - M')$$

If we know a plaintext-ciphertext pair such that $$x I_{n-1} - M'$$ is inversible (i.e. $$x$$ is not an eigenvalue of $$M'$$), then we can solve this equation and recover the key $$\tau$$.

However, we are given only 5 ciphertexts $$G, H, Z, U, C$$ and do not know the corresponding plaintexts...
But we know that the scheme is homomorphic, and that plaintexts are elements of the field $$F$$.
In particular, for any $$X = FHE(x)$$, we know that $$X^{p-1} = FHE(x^{p-1}) = FHE(1)$$ because the multiplicative group of $$F$$ has order $$p-1$$.
This gives us the known plaintext-ciphertext pair that we need!

With the given values, it turns out that $$G^{p-1}$$ does not work because the matrix is not inversible, but $$Z^{p-1}$$ does the trick and we can recover the secret key $$\tau$$.
This [Sage script](/resources/2017/plaidctf/FHE/break-fhe.sage) recovers the key and decrypts the ciphertexts.

```
g = 19
h = 52774084559796279986932845454574924346254819718383580319471373405857169799126978135712589651459738007
z = 74806619223436318057488019757923349388331709109526109048262015729998830471407099824963764117455225281
u = 161202540669710418030574172350388444507933259401173773637054984225018825685147997081838166382338594386
c = 99581767808000746292621272224666290248510197049015601126446298319169184317601777135057806610999909987
```

#### Weak group for ElGamal

The challenge now consists of solving the ElGamal problem over the field $$F = GF(p)$$.
This amounts to finding the secret exponent $$x$$ such that $$h = g^x$$ (discrete logarithm problem).
It turns out that the chosen prime $$p$$ (of 337 bits) is weak because $$p-1$$ has small factors:

```python
sage: factor(P - 1)
2^8 * 3 * 5^2 * 7^3 * 13^3 * 17 * 23 * 41 * 191 * 727 * 2389 * 2617 * 4451 * 8678318629 * 108546579551 * 126366136639 * 134180934337 * 17434239546719 * 695890117602047
```

In particular, we can use the [Pohlig-Hellman algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pohlig%E2%80%93Hellman_algorithm) to compute the discrete log.
Sage has a built-in `discrete_log` function but it used more than 4GB of RAM before we aborted.
We wrote our own implementation of Pohlig-Hellman in the [following script](/resources/2017/plaidctf/FHE/break-elgamal.sage).

For the biggest prime factor $$p_{max} = 695890117602047$$, we split the look-up table of the [baby-step giant-step algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baby-step_giant-step) into two passes, each fitting into 4GB of RAM.
Indeed, this last prime requires a look-up table of $$\sqrt{p_{max}} = 26.3M$$ entries, each containing at least a group element of 337 bits (without taking into account the overhead of a hash table in Python).

Once $$x$$ is recovered, we can decrypt the flag as $$m = c u^{-x} - z$$.

```
x = 131426230370998706684707180455307948782769587060042913899926112173267357048112721116886754336478065989
PCTF{eigen_see_a_valuable_flag_here}
```

